DEVOPS IN THE ASCENDENCY
Transformations toward web-based and mobile-friendly applications --> organizations forced to completely reexamine their 
software development and IT management practices.
Small teams with cross-functional expertise. No more separate team of development and operation.
Increase ability to deliver new capabilities to end users, leveraging automation, aiming "continuos delivery" to suit 
emerging customer preferences. 
Transform the SDLC (Software Development Life Cycle) to increase efficiency and meet end users' changing expectations.
Mentality and flexibility: enterprises vs startups. Using devops allow enterprises becoming more agile in order to better 
keep pace with their smaller rivals.

IT IMPASSE
Before: separate teams overseeing discrete technology functions.
Three transformational forces: products to services, efficiency to agility, separation to fusion.
Producer/consumer relationship has been reversed. Now producers have to respond to customers' behaviors rather than
dictaing them. This is no more possible following a waterfall model (define all the requirements and features at the start)
because in the time taken to realese the software, business conditions may have changed. Problem definitions and 
requirements can change as new solutions are considered and implemented, so much more flexibility is required. This 
can be reached with agile development which involves iterative problem solving and continuos feedback.
Problem with agile development: development teams focused on speed and agility, IT operations focused on stability and
some of their processes can be too rigid to support newer applications desgined to be always changing.
Recent technology trends to bypass IT operations: polyglot programming languages, programmable infrastructure, 
open source software (increase agility with tools that simplify and automate many tasks), cloud and platform as-a-service, 
containers, canary releases, design for failure. 
Delivering faster doesn't guarantee success (common failings...).
Development teams must continuosly deliver software services at an increased velocity --> teams might be the necessity to 
change application architectures to improve software flexibility.
Older architecture: monolith architecture: applications are packaged and operate as a single unit (brittleness, risk, 
tightly coupled, dependencies). Modern architecture: microservice architecture: involve building applications as a set of 
small indipendent services, each microservice focuses on a specific element of business functionality (independent 
deployment, independent coding, fault tolerance, increased agility)

DEVOPS FOUNDATIONS
Devops culture involves creating new shared values and behaviors across IT teams.
Before: IT teams organized in technical silos, where change was less frequent but occurred in greater volumes. Multi-functional cross must be estabilished 
across IT teams.
Analytic tools to put staff in the shoes of customers and get realistic insights into the customer experience.
Modification of communication structure in order to improve cross-functional IT collaborations: small teams each one responsible of a part of an overall system
 --> really important collaboration between this teams. Expecially the collaboration between development and operation: operation team members regularly partecipate
in meetings in order to understand how important is developing code quickly, at the same time development team members attend operational workshop to gain
better insights into the problems caused by poorly performig or insecure software.
Organizations' business model:
- run the business
- grow the business (Netflix)
- transform the business (Amazon)
Try to reduce element of waste like the friction between development and operation which causes delays.
Eight element of waste (table): Defects, Overproduction, Waiting, Non-value added processing, Transportation, Inventory, Motion, Employee knowledge
DevOps metrics:
There are existing measures and type of metrics but they are counter DevOps principles: vanity metrics (ex: lines of code produced, may be counterproductive 
beacuse reward the wrong type of behavior), intra-metrics team, traditional metrics (ex: MTBF, may be counterproductive because with faster delivery of
services some failure is to be expected).
Suitability checklist: obtainable (some metrics may be difficult to obtain or quantify), reviewable (easily collected but no tangible value), incorruptible (check 
if metrics may be influenced by team bias), actionable (any metrics must support improved decision making). 
One common mistake is, for example, to measure too many elements; metrics applicable to DevOps may be new to organizations (speed of deployment, rate of change,
customer reponsiveness).
Metrics applicable to DevOps:
- Culture, collaboration and sharing: provide an ongoing indicator of acceptance / resistance to DevOps (ex: staff retention rates/turnover, employee morale)
- Efficiency and effectiveness: metrics here normally focus on elements of development and operational capabilities and also customer-centric ratios
(full-time-equivalent, cost of release, cost per transaction/app)
- Quality and velocity: rate of rollbacks, cycle time, MTTR (mean time to recover)
- Customer and business value: metrics which help measure how DevOps supports business goals like increased customer loyalty (measured with the metric NPS)
and faster time-to-market (time taken from when code starts development to successful production deployment

ESSENTIAL DEVOPS TOOLING

1. BUILD
In the digital economy, building API is essential for executing ideas quickly and seizing new business opportunities 
APIs provide the essential glue that binds together internal business departments, allowing them to operate as a seamless whole, so if sales needs access to 
marketing data or marketing needs custome analytics, the secret sauce will be an API. APIs help unify people, process and technology across the software 
lifecycle, and this is extremely beneficial from a DevOps perspective: if development needs access to application performance information from production monitoring 
tools, it's an API that'll service the request. With APIs, modern applications can be developed faster and integrating existing systems becomes easier.
API management embodies the principles of DevOps by managing the API lifecycle. The definition of APIs is not limited to just the development team, IT operations and
business stakeholders also need to be involved to enusure APIs are aligned to the overall program initiatives.
Ongoing measurement and monitoring is often overlooked in the API lifecycle, analytics play a critical role in answering question about APIs issues: in a DevOps 
context, they are also especially valuable in serving essential information and feedback to cross-funcitonal team members in order to drive API improvements: 
performance analytics (providing developers with real-time insight into operational performance such as API latency), business analytics (tracking usage and consumption
by external partners and developers in order to better respond to market demand), app experience analytics (report on metrics, providing complete return on investment).
Automation and integration are essential for capturing such insights with minimum effort and that's why effective API management is founded on intelligent and 
integrated tools that simplify different stages of the lifecycle for different stakeholders.
Security is a major concern across the API lifecycle, in a DevOps context, information security professionals will work with developers to identify and neutralize critical
threats: the goal shouldn't be to wait for security issues later, but rather to help teams estabilish string security as they design, create and test APIs.
Developers look for API management to help them discover, acquire, and consume APIs quickly, therefore is really important that API management should suport simplified 
and controlled access to data in order to shield developers from unnecessary complexity.
Problem in API performance monitoring: API Managment Gateways (detailed insight into APIs issues, but lack the depth of analysis of application performance) vs Application
Performance Management (powerful analysis of application performance but lack inclusion of API-level data. So it's really important the integration between APM and 
API management Gateways. Bridging the gap between API management and APM solutions can help teams collaborate effectively. By monitoring detailed API metrics and data
traversing gateways in combination with APM analytics, teams can detect slow growing problem and fast acting acute ones. 
API management solutions simplify the process of developers gaining access top APIs, but if back-end systems aren't available for testing connectivity, there can be 
delivery delays. One of the possible solution is the integration of API management with service virtualization (which emulates the behavior of dependent systems and allows
developers to use services as soon as they are available, rather than having to wait until the process is complete).
Digital disruptors have already recognized the value that APIs and effective management can deliver in terms of customer engagement, satisfaction and retention. More than 
65 percent of digital diruptors use APIs internally for building their web applications, mobile apps etc.

2. TEST
DevOps principles and practices are not only intended to improve the tempo of software releases but also increase quality and with DevOps 'focus on an automating 
software pipeline, the traditional methods for ensuring quality must now be quesitoned and reviewed.
Automation will be key for testing to become estabilished within both continuos integration and continuos delivery processes. 
Testing is essential to DevOps beacuse it brings the discipline into the development processes and avoids the problem (release delays and quality issues) created by leaving 
QA as a gate or rubber-stamp function only performed at the very end of the cycle.
The role of tester will change: the focus of testing will shift toward a more consultative role that will help developers learn how to write better tests and 
improve their approaches to scanning for quality. We are going toward a new comprehensive and elevated test discipline rather than just executing a series of 
a day-to-day tasks. Some new skills include: thinking beyond pass or fail (helping the business understand what the customer actually experiences and how that can be best 
simulated during testing), intimate understanding (QA and testing staff need to become far more proficient and understanding all the intricacies), assurance to analytics 
(instead of documenting defects and reporting back to development, QA must shift toward collecting and aggregating data from a broad range of automated tests to determine 
the actual cause of defects and where more rigorous testing is needed), mentorship over conflict (rather than costantly being called in to address fragile developers-written
tests, DevOps focused QA will work closely with their coding colleagues to continuosly improve testing resilience), quality over quantity (redundant , duplicate tests 
guarantees nothing but cost and delays, QA and testing teams should consider advanced automation methods that generate the smallest number of test cases needed for 100 
percent functional coverage).
A key goal of DevOps should be making testing an accelerator an not an obstacle to fast application delivery with the highest levels of quality.
Agile testing trifecta: test automation, test data management, test constraint removal. 
Test Automation: manual definition of test cases is a slow and unsystematic process that leads to perhaps 10-20 percent functional test coverage. If testing is going to keep 
pace with continuos delivery goals, it needs to become much more automated and agile. Test assets can be derived directly from the design and updated automatically to
reflect changing user needs. It's really important the ability to create test cases right from requirements.
The goal is that every layer of the application and the complex interactions between components is automatically testes and verified
throughout the software lifecycle. True extensibility means one tool coordinating and running functional tests on multiple mobile devices under various conditions, traditional
approaches to testing is no longer sufficient: code needs to be tested using the same conditions that the app will run under when in the hands of a user, test should also
allow for different profiles simulating network conditions, location, background applications and device orientation.
Test Data Management: every tester needs quality test data and quickly, the challenge is getting the right data to match their tests when they need it. To address the complex
issues involved with the acquisition of quality data and regulatory compliance, modern test data management solutions will provide synthetic test data generation (contains all
of the characteristics of production but none of the sensitive content)
If testing is going to keep pace with continuos delivery goals, it needs to become much more automated and agile. The manual definition of test cases is a slow and 
unsystematic process that leads to perhaps 10-20 percent functional test coverage, manual testing uses up resources which can be seen as a waste by developers,
expecially when they have other important projects to work on, this is exactly why automating tests is important. 
--> incomplete requirements equals faulty software and make unefficiency tests.
Every tester needs quality test data and quickly, the challenge is the right data to match their tests when they need it. 

3. DEPLOY
To keep pace with demands for new features and application updates, digital transformation must be driven by continuos delivery (the ability to rapidly and reliably release 
software across the pipeline at any time. Continuosly delivering software is an extremely collaborative process that spans multiple departments. Major obstacles are delays 
and release bottlenecks (for example inefficiencies caused by the uncoordinated adoption of open source tools, leading to duplication of effort, redundant solutions etc.).
Three way to accelerate maturity:
- Connect end-to-end release management: the key is the ability to automate and standardize application release all the way from development through to production; 
rather than act in isolation, release automation must easily integrate with other processes and tools (e.g., continuos integration, configuration management) across the 
continuos delivery toolchain 
- Automated to continuos: some pressure points drive a shift to better pipeline management; the continuos delivery pipeline is becoming the single control point 
and application delivery is becoming streamlined, predictable and risk-free. At this stage release automation is orchestrating tools and processes beyond deployment, 
including application lifecycle management and service management processes.
- Optimize the continuos delivery pipeline: with the continuos delivery pipeline being too important to fail, attention should become focused toward making the pipeline
as efficient, stable, resilient as possible. Shifting toward mastering the art of releasing multi-app, cross-app, multi-team applications and making deployments more 
predictable and efficient. Improving business execution through accelerated feeback loops will be anothe benefit.
More advanced solutions will serve as an integration hub, orchestrating many activities across the pipeline (for example at a simple level this could involve 
application-centric release automation to configure all the resources needed to support a new build).
Release automation toolchain integrations needed to optimize continuos delivery:
1. Requirements design: this integration allows agile teams to track multi-application release content through the software lifecycle and establish critical feedbacks
loops for faster problem resolution; with a real-time dashboard for managing and monitoring multi-application release content (user stories, features, bug fixes) 
through the pipeline, agile teams gain complete visibility of release progress. Without this integration, agile teams would have to manually track and report on 
business-level user stories, features, or fixes to specific application releases moving through the pipeline.
2. Service virtualization: this integration automates the launch of virtual services as part of a deployment to optimize resources and speed testing.
3. Test Data Management: this integration automates the generation of accurate test data based on proper test cases within a release workflow.
4. Test Automation: this integration automatically starts the test case process and with the results linked back to the release it confirms readiness for promotion.
Without this integration it would be necessary to manually determine if the application has sufficiently passed a testing stage in order to move forward to the next
stage and then manually promote the application.
5. This integration establishes monitoring earlier in the software lifecycle in order to feedback critical information needed to improve quality; release automation
can coordinate the installation and activation of monitoring in pre-production enabling teams to see performance impact of releases and compare it against 
production baselines.
6. Existing toolchain investments:...

When building multi-component/multi-application systems, there will be complex dependencies between applications or different versions of an application, the
knowledge of which application version depends on which is critical and often only known to a small number of experts, systems should be able to establish the 
definition of these dependencies with automatic alerts when dependency conditions are not met.
Systems should provide a clear view of the release pipeline, including all phases and all tasks within each phase.
The best way to start is by assessing processes, culture, and tools currently in use.






?:
operation task
environment
API gateway
different branches vs committing in trunk
back-end vs front-end systems
application economy
test: in che linguaggio? lanciati esclusivamente sul codice?
synthetic data
automatizzare la deployment--> in che senso?




envisage: prevedere
intricacies: complessità
streamline: snellire
enhance: migliorare
lagged behind: rimasta indietro
to address: affrontare (un qualcosa, una problematica)
by way of example: a titolo di esempio
Regardless (of): indipendentemente
error prone: incline a errori
readiness: disponibilità











